Porter's sources tonight at 8:00 p.m.
Eastern on c-span the Warren Commission
released its report on the Kennedy
assassination forty years ago in
September of the assassination archives
and Research Center hosted a symposium
on the Commission's findings this panel
looked at possible connections to the
CIA this is a little over an hour a
reporter for The Washington Post and has
written a series of articles over the
past two or three years which have made
stunning revelations in particular about
the CIA's obstruction of the probe by
the House Select Committee on
assassinations John Newman as most of
you know is a former major in army
intelligence he's now a professor at the
University of Maryland he's a longtime
researcher has been doing sound will
work on the case for for many years the
two of them are combining as sort of a
tag team this afternoon to give you a
presentations on on what the Warren
Commission missed unwitting participants
and unindicted co-conspirators
thank you Jim is that working thank you
Jim
John and I decided to team up today
because of our mutual interest in the
CIA and the Kennedy assassination and in
particular in an area that we have done
a lot of work on together and apart on
what CIA personnel and officials knew
about Lee Harvey Oswald before the
assassination so we're gonna run through
that today just by way of introduction
or setting the scene for what we're
talking about I think that this
conference is helpful useful and
important because it brings together on
the 40th anniversary of the Warren
Commission a snapshot of the continuing
decomposition of the credibility of the
Warren Commission report we've known
long known that the substantial solid
majority of the people of the American
people are skeptical of and reject the
Warren reports conclusions thanks to
David Talbott we have a more complete
picture now of how the political elite
privately shared many of those
suspicions Lyndon Johnson Bobby Kennedy
Fidel Castro Richard Nixon J Edgar
Hoover and for the purposes of our
conversation today the one point I would
like to note is that many of these
people despite their are very different
ideological perspectives and mindsets
came together to arrive at a general
conclusion that the assassination had
somehow originated in the world of Cuban
American politics what we are going to
look at today is what CIA officials knew
about Lee Harvey Oswald before the
assassination and how they responded and
how they handled that knowledge
afterwards and John's going to pick it
up here
the fine work of the assassination
records Review Board has given us nearly
6 million pages of new documents a lot
of the material is known and includes
significant evidence from CIA records
evidence withheld from the Warren
Commission well the evidence in these
records is insufficient to determine who
the ultimate perpetrators of the crime
were it is sufficient to establish that
Oswald's Cuban escapades were part of
the plot the documents make it clear
that many CI officers became and meshed
in these escapades both in New Orleans
in Mexico City and in headquarters after
the president's murder covering it up we
know of at least a dozen such officers
at the CIA due to time constraints Jeff
and I will identify several of them but
only talk about three in more detail we
believe two of these CI officers were
unwitting participants and the third was
an unindicted co-conspirator in the
conspiracy to kill JFK it was their job
to know about Oswald and to take action
concerning him with respect to the
incoming reports on his Cuban capers
before Kennedy was killed while
unwitting in the plot their collective
responses played a significant role in
the intelligence failure that culminated
in the president's murder in a nutshell
a CI officer that Jeff will discuss
shortly manipulated Oswald in a manner
to establish the story that Oswald was
an agent of Castro while still others at
CI headquarters that I will discuss took
actions that suppress that story from
the Mexico City station they did this at
the very moment Oswald went to Mexico
City to put his Cuban story in play and
a failed attempt to obtain a visa to go
there to Cuba you may draw me out
further on this in the qat but I'm going
to move along what the station learned
about Oswald's Cuban contacts in Mexico
City they reported the headquarters
those reports and the taped phone
conversations of a conspirator who
impersonated Oswald to further link him
to Castro in the Kremlin were destroyed
and covered up by CIA headquarters after
the president's murder while these
reports and tapes with us destroyed
story itself was not President Johnson
used it to force Earl Warren and others
to take part in a national security
cover-up I will deal with that part
shortly but first let's take a closer
look at some of the CI officers who
handled the Oswald Cuban student
director D re story before the
assassination for the purposes of this
discussion here I'm going to start on
August 1st 1963 on that day a man named
George Joanna DS was promoted to become
the chief of the psychological warfare
staff in the JM wave station of the CIA
in Miami Georgia and edie's at that time
was 40 years old he was a 10-year
veteran of the clandestine service he
reported directly to deputy director
Richard Helms five days after and and
among the chief among his duties in
Miami was handling of the CIA contacts
with one of the most prominent and
effective anti-castro exile
organizations the directorial
Revolucionario
as students heal student revolutionary
Directorate also known in the American
press as the Cuban student Directorate
and sometimes by its initials D re in
CIA files that Joe and edie's generated
on the group the group was known by the
code name and spell this is Joe and
Edie's fitness report you can see that
it was written on July 31st 1963 the day
before he took over and you can see in
the bottom line he's the case officer
for a student project involving and
these are important terms political
action propaganda and intelligence
gathering those are important because
five days later Lee Harvey Oswald
wanders into the New Orleans chapter of
the d-r-e and announces that he wants to
help them in their fight against Castro
this is Oswald the alleged leftist the
d-r-e rebuffs his advance and begins to
engage in intelligence collection on
Oswald they send people out to find out
who
is a political action they accost him
handing out leaflets on the corner they
challenged him to a debate on the radio
they taped the debate on the radio and
then propaganda they put out a press
release denouncing Oswald and calling
for a federal investigation of his
activities this is three months before
he is assassinated president before he
allegedly assassinated President Kennedy
at the time Joann Dedes was Johnny D's
was supplying the group with up to 25
thousand dollars a month that's probably
about a hundred and fifty thousand
dollars a month in today's money and the
VRE his assets the am spell assets
proceeded to do the intelligence
collection keep tabs on Oswald and and
make a big deal of his pro-castro
connections these incidents draw the
attention the street fight between the
d-r-e members and Oswald draws the
attention of the FBI and the incident is
taken seriously by federal authorities
we don't know Joe and Edie's response to
that the records of his activities in
August 1963 are missing from the CIA
files but we do know that the report on
Oswald in the d-r-e was forwarded to
Washington and now John will pick up the
story here
we're gonna be able to use it screen
in a second yeah no okay
okay
can we just turn that off
no all right that FBI report on Oswald
and the d-r-e as well as another one
earlier on his f pcc activities in
Dallas before he went to New Orleans
were sent to CI headquarters in
Washington and one on Oswald and the
d-r-e landed on the desk of Jane row man
on October the 4th Jane was a liaison
officer working in James Angleton's
counterintelligence staff the Oswald
d-r-e story then went to two officers
working at the counterintelligence
section of the agency's Cuban Affairs
staff the SAS when Boswell put that up
now Rex and it stayed there for three
important days the 8th 9th and 10th of
October during those 3 days it was
during those three days at CIA
headquarters and it's Mexico City
Station exchanged cables on Oswald and
his escapades in Mexico
I'm talking about right here this is the
8th 9th and 10th and both of these
individuals work in the
counterintelligence section of a
specialist fair staff that's where the
odds wall d-r-e story was sitting in the
CIA the time at the station and
headquarters exchanged information on
Oswald now in the Mexico City station
that's a cover sheet by the way you're
looking at a cover sheet to that d-r-e
report the report that the FBI report
that we're talking about this is the
routing sheet that people sign for when
they read the documents and this one in
particular was that FBI report when the
Mexico City Station after discovering
Oswald Oswald's activities they're asked
headquarters who he was the headquarters
response was authored by John Whitton
alias John sell so here's his signature
right here on the bottom of the cable
that was sent from headquarters
he was the agency's chief of covert
operations for Mexico and Central
America
now Jane Roman participated in the
coordination of the headquarters
response as you can see here's her
signature on both of these documents
here a response which concealed from the
mexico station
Oswald's activities with the d-r-e and
the free play for Cuba committee and as
much as it says and this is just the
last paragraph our latest information is
the State Department port dated May 62
well of course it isn't because they've
got all these reports that they're
reading the very people who are writing
and coordinating on this you can find
there it's Jane in Rome and there's her
signature up there
so in essence headquarters is
suppressing the story not informing it's
Mexico City Station of Oswald's Cuban
activities in New Orleans and in Dallas
in an interview at which both Jeff and I
were present Jane admitted she said
quote I know I'm signing off on
something that's not true her
involvement however was minimal and she
told us that whatever operation it was
was very closely held and it was in the
SAS which
comports very well with the documents
being right there
NSA has counterintelligence at the time
both Jeff and I found her account
credible when she gave it to us in the
mid-1990s and we still feel she was
telling the truth it's more difficult to
know whether John Witten the chief for
the Mexico and Central America desk and
the drafter of the response to concealed
the Cubans story was privy to this SAS
Oswalt operation he had greater
responsibility for the headquarters
response than others like Jane who were
only in on the coordination was he
signing off on something he knew wasn't
true
if the FBI reports were withheld from
him then he might have believed there
was nothing in the file since Oswald had
returned to America 18 months earlier on
the other hand he might have like Jane
known about the reports but was told
that withholding their contents from the
Mexico station was necessary to support
some ongoing counterintelligence
operation Witten died in January 2000
before anyone had a chance to ask him
based on his genuine effort to get it
the truth of the Cuban story after the
assassination Jeff and I believe that
much of the store was probably withheld
from him at the time that he drafted
this cable he was certainly sore after
the assassination about the information
on the Cubans story that Helms withheld
from him then you can find that in his
HSC a just deposition or at least a
couple of years ago and I think I'm
gonna turn it back over to Jeff at this
point this takes us up through this
takes us up through October 10th 1963 as
the CIA headquarters registers the
information that that Oswald has been in
Mexico City Oswald of course returns to
Dallas takes a job in the Texas
schoolbook depository he has a gun he's
not identified as any kind of threat to
the President on the November 22nd the
motorcade passes by the School Book
Depository shots rang out
Kennedy is killed 90 minutes later
Oswald is arrested how Jane Roman John
Whitin and George Joanne Dedes responded
to the development
of Oswald's arrest illuminates what the
CIA would and would not share with the
Warren Commission John Witten was
working at CIA headquarters that day and
he recalled in one of his reports the
effect of the announcement of Oswald's
name and Witten said the effect was
electrifying Oswald was not an unknown
commodity in the Western Hemisphere
division of the CIA his name meant
something to people and that's why they
were electrified the next day Witten
immediately began to try and recover all
information from CIA files that he could
do in the next day in a meeting and
Deputy Director Helms his office Helms
acquiesce to Whitman's wish to take over
the review of all Oswald files this was
a plausible request Witten was a
experienced counterintelligence
investigator he was one of the leaders
in introducing the polygraph to the CIA
it was natural that he would take over
such an important investigation
Jane Roman too in her description in her
interview with me and John described
going immediately going to work to see
what could be found out about Oswald in
Miami most tellingly George Jo and
edie's laid low he received a phone call
around five o'clock from the members of
the d-r-e and one of the the member who
made that phone call has described it in
some detail to me and the members of the
d-r-e called him and said we know all
about this Oswald fellow we ran into him
in New Orleans and we're gonna publicize
everything we know Joe and Edie's
reportedly replied let me check with
headquarters I'll get back to you
the d-r-e didn't wait for his response
they immediately went public but there's
no indication and this is from the
former members of the d-r-e four of them
Joe and Edie's never got back to them to
tell them not to go public or not to do
what they did they immediately started
calling reporters and by 6 o'clock the
story of Oswald's activities on behalf
of the fair play for Cuba committee in
New Orleans were being broadcast around
the world the next day the story was
featured prominently in New York Times
Washington Post Washington star Miami
Herald Miami News and countless other
stories and so in this way the am spell
program that Joe and edie's was running
came to shape the initial perception and
media coverage of the Opera of the
Kennedy assassination and in light of
Joe and Edie's responsibilities for
psychological warfare
this is especially revealing Joe and
edie's was stayed in close touch with
the group in the days after the
assassination he helped extricate one
leading member from from Cuba he did not
act like a man who was surprised that
his own agents had been in touch with a
presidential assassin he acted like a
man who was running a covert operation
and now John's going to pick up with
what happens in the days that followed
when President Kennedy was murdered
there was a huge problem as insiders
like Johnny D's Witten and Roman and
others immediately recognized Oswald
looked like an agent of Castro in the
Kremlin and see I had known about it for
six weeks before the assassination and
again I've talked about this and given
presentations on this I'm not going to
show you a lot of documents about that
today furthermore Oswald's activities
with the Soviet and Cuban embassies in
Mexico were in the CIA's records as a
result of the fact that the conspirator
had impersonated Oswald on the telephone
in the Mexican capital on Saturday
morning just 20 hours after the murder
LBJ and Hoover talked about this very
sensitive problem but within 48 hours
the tapes of that impersonation were
made to disappear at that time were soon
after the cables from the Mexico City CI
station were altered to delete all
references to Oswald's Cuban contacts
there in this way the story of Oswald as
Castro Kremlin agent a story that the
CIA itself had helped to create was
eviscerated from the CIA's pre
assassination records again we can
discuss this further in the Q&A but you
might also want to contact Ben Wecht who
was the sort of the organizer that great
conference last year and you can get all
the documents that that I put together
for the presentation there to lay out
the evidence for the covering up of or
actually the alteration of those cables
and for the suppression of the tape
story but the story itself that Castro
Anna or the Kremlin might have been
behind the president's assassin was now
used to force the national security
cover-up and we'll put the next one on
there Rex Hoover and Deputy Attorney
General Katzenbach worked out the
details on Sunday afternoon and on
Monday morning Katzenbach completed the
story in coordination with LBJ's top
aide Bill Moyers this is the famous
Katzenbach memo and essentially it boils
down that is it has to show that Oswald
did it no conspirators were at large it
was not a communist conspiracy and
furthermore it was not a right-wing
conspiracy dressed up to look like a
communist one those were the ground
rules and the Warren Commission never
wavered from these
rules these parameters President Johnson
then used the secret story of Oswald and
his Castro Kremlin ties as leverage to
form the committee executive commission
they head off any congressional
investigation of the president's murder
let's go to the next one you may have
seen some of these at other parts of
this conference for my purposes I'll
just remind you that this is the
leverage being applied to Senator
Russell who did not want the job was
forcing the job with the argument that
40 million Americans were going to die
because of who owes wold was and let's
go to the next one Rex
oh yeah it's not the one you played yeah
you listen to this at during Rex's ok
well I'm my purpose is only in
establishing that he's using this World
War three threat to pressure people in
taking the job and including the Chief
Justice himself Earl Warren who refused
the job to was asked twice by by Bobby
Kennedy order down to the White House
refuses Johnson and as as he says I just
pulled out that little story on Mexico
City that Hoover told me and he had him
in tears he had him crying now unless
you this of course the the LBJ tapes but
if you don't believe LBJ cyclical the
next one Earl Warren himself confirmed
this story on WTHI right here in
Washington years later where he told the
same story except for he left out the
part about crying but essentially that
the Johnson said there was a threat of
nuclear war and given that he said I'll
have to take the job this ensured that
there would be no real investigation the
raison d'tre for the formation of the
Commission itself was averting a nuclear
war the Commission was not told what the
CIA knew about Oswald before the
assassination and from its inception the
Commission had to comply with the
Katzenbach parameters Oswald had acted
alone there was
communist conspiracy and no right-wing
conspiracy that is the legacy of the
Warren Commission that it never examined
the true story of Oswald in the CIA
which is where I feel the smoking gun
really lies and I was invited to make a
comparison with a 9/11 Commission and
I'll do that right now and very briefly
I think this legacy has been repeated
not just in the 9/11 Commission but in
the joint inquiry as well as 9/11
Commission and as much as the smoking
gun was never examined and I say that
because two weeks after 9/11 the FBI
announced that they had found the
smoking gun in the 9/11 attacks but two
weeks later they buried the story
completely and you can ask me more about
that at the Q&A if you're you're
interested in it but I see some
parallels there Jeff since 1963 we've
learned a lot about what what the Warren
Commission didn't know and particularly
with the work of the Review Board in the
last since 1994 we've come to a much
clearer picture of CIA pre assassination
knowledge of Oswald we've also learned a
lot about what insiders like Jain Rome
and John Whitin and George Jo and edie's
did and their response is not in the
immediate aftermath of the assassination
but in the years and decades afterwards
also illuminates what the heart of what
the Warren Commission missed Jane Roman
was a very loyal CIA employee her
husband was a career officer who was
very close to Allen Dulles she never
spoke about the these matters to anybody
until John and I interviewed her and
when when we interviewed her we found
her to be quite candid it was apparent
to us that she had not carefully
considered what the Oswald paper-trail
showed and when we showed her the Oswald
paper trail she described very candidly
what it showed to her and that was that
somebody in the agency's Special Affairs
staff the anti-castro operation had a
keen interest in Oswald and that was
reflected in the handling of the October
10th 1963 cable
she said it was these people who had who
had and she did not know who they were
and I believe that she did not know who
they were had arranged for the the
dissemination of the inaccurate
information to Mexico City about Oswald
she expressed no qualms about this and
she endorsed the Warren Commission's
findings in our conversation with her
John Whitin on the other hand thought
that Oswald's Cuba related activities
had to be investigated after a couple of
weeks after Helms had named him to run
the internal file review on Oswald was
nearing completion of his preliminary
report when he was allowed to look at
the FBI's preliminary report on Oswald
as well and he realized upon reading
that that report at the at the White
House in early December that Richard
Helms and James angleton had not been
sharing all of the CIA's information
about Oswald with him Witten felt
deceived he immediately returned to CIA
headquarters and complained to Helms and
angleton about this and he related all
this in sworn testimony to the HSE a
which was not declassified until 1995
Helms relieved him of his investigatory
duties on the spot and he returned to
his other other activities in the
Western Hemisphere he only told the he
he finished his career at the CIA and
lived out the rest of his life in
self-imposed exile in Vienna Austria he
only told the story once to the HSC a he
did not talk about conspiracy in that in
that deposition but he did emphasize
that he did not think Oswald's
background had been properly
investigated and that the question of
his Cuba related activities was one that
he was especially interested if the
investigation had followed his course he
said that he would have gone into Miami
and tried to determine what people knew
about Oswald's activities there he was
never allowed to do that I would guess
that the reason that he was never
allowed to do that is because that would
have led him straight into the arms of
George Jo and edie's the man who had
been running the the Cuban group that
had the most contact with us
and was busy disseminating the story
that Oswald had acted at Castro's behest
George Jo and edie's thought the story
of what he had been doing had to be
hidden and he did his best for the rest
of his life to make sure that it
remained hidden his role in funding
Oswald's antagonists in the d-r-e was
hidden from the Warren Commission
David Slauson confirmed that in a
conversation with me recently the d-r-e
is conspiracy mongering the linking the
public linking of Oswald to Castro was
not the subject was not a subject that
Jo and Edie submitted any reports on and
he went in April 1964 he was reassigned
and went on to other assignments in
Saigon and Athens fifteen years passed
and in 1978 when the House Select
Committee on assassinations reopened the
JFK probe and the investigators from the
HSC a began to go to the CIA asking hard
questions and demanding files the CIA
called Jo and edie's out of retirement
and put him in charge as this agency's
liaison with the congressional
investigation Jo and edie's never
disclosed his own role in the events of
1963 I when I figured out and obtained
the documents and the interviews that
described and documented what Jo needs
have been doing I presented them to Bob
Blakey he was quite astounded he
remembered Jo and Edie as well and so
did other investigators on the HSE a and
he said that he had law his previous
endorsement of CIA cooperation which he
had signed as part of the HSC a report
saying that the congressional
investigators had received with the
cooperation of the CIA he said he would
now retract that that this was a
violation of trust that it was his
understanding that nobody dealing with
the with with the investigators would
have been operational in 1963 Blakey
went so far as to describe Jo and edie's
actions as obstruction of Congress and a
felony and Blakey tells me that he feels
that the revelation of Jo and Edie's as
roles in 1963 in 1978 makes him more
inclined to see the CIA as hand in a
conspiracy
unless
inclined to see the Mafia um Joe and
edie's lived in retirement and Potomac
until 1991 when he died he was never
questioned about his knowledge of the
events of 1963 so looking back over
these over these people and the history
of what they knew where do we come down
I think John has made clear
Jane Roman clearly had pre assassination
knowledge of Lee Harvey Oswald's
activities she received reports on him
she signed off but she was in she was in
no way witting and she would be in a an
unwitting participant John Whitin is a
little more deeply involved because he
had authority to sign off on those
cables about Oswald in October 1963 so
if there were inaccurate statements
putting out he bears some responsibility
unfortunately all the documentary
evidence that surround this was never
able to prove it will to be presented to
John witin I was looking for him in the
late 1990s and had tracked into Austria
but by that time he had moved to a
nursing home in Pottstown Pennsylvania
where he died so we were never able to
question him
Giorgio's and edie's is a different
story he never reported in his contact
between his agents and a presidential
and accused presidential assassin and
every CIA officer who I've talked to
regards that as either highly improper
or highly implausible every CIA officer
I talked to said that Johnny D's was
under a firm legal professional
obligation to report the contacts
between the d-r-e and Oswald as their
case officer several of them several CIA
officers said that due to the
sensitivity of the material he might
have done so orally and not on paper I
do believe that may be true but if so we
have no record and there's no record
anywhere of what Johnny D's reported the
fact that he returns to the JFK story 15
years later and is in a position to
thwart congressional investigators
asking about these matters I think has
to be taken as an indication of bad
faith he was more than an unwitting
participant I don't think that there's a
there is no evidence that he had
advanced knowledge of a plot so he
certainly could not be called or
suggested in any way that he was a
co-conspirator but he does seem to have
been an accessory after the fact to hide
what the CIA knew about Oswald before
the assassination in legal terms I think
I would describe him as an unindicted
co-conspirator and what that will close
and take questions
because we need somebody up here with a
microphone to sort of hand up thank you
I have been going over a lot of the same
ground recently and I want to concur and
expand on some of what you said ah first
with the general point Whitten was a
stand-up guy
he was one of the few CIA witnesses
among any before any of the bodies who
really wanted to provide some real
information one of the things I felt I
learned from his testimony which is very
connected what you're saying is that
inside the CIA nobody knows anything
about what anybody else is doing
it's set up that way that's the way it's
supposed to run now getting specific and
this was explained by another helpful
witness for the most part Sam Halpern
who was the deputy of Desmond Fitzgerald
who was the head of SAS and who
explained that SAS had been set up in
1963 or late 62 as the get Castro branch
that was its job and it was fully
independent from the rest of Western
Hemisphere and actually Jeff the one
thing I would question what you said
although you may know more than I do is
join Edie's reporting directly to Helms
I would've thought he would have report
directly to Fitzgerald but I that's
always supposition on my part now thus
it makes perfect sense that if SAS knew
something about Oswald which other
people didn't which I think they did
they would have wanted that FBI report
in their custody and it makes perfect
sense that they would have allowed this
cable traffic that originated in Mexico
City and went back to be handled by
somebody else in wh4
when they knew the truth now the other
point I want to make has to do with the
Warren Commission scale so as you point
out was originally appointed head of the
investigation and head liaison to the
Warren Commission to respond and queries
what no no scale so scale so scale so
his wit is wet wet okay that was wrong
in the sense that if you really wanted
the liaison to be the person who would
know the relevant information about
attempts to kill Castro etc it would
have been somebody from SAS
it would have been Fitzgerald or a
deputy of his so they've already pushed
it one level away from the people to
know anything but what I found
fascinating was even that wasn't good
enough and it had to be moved yet
further away to Angleton who had
absolutely nothing to do with it so I
really applaud what you're doing but I
think this is a very important thing to
understand about the CIA and is totally
different from the FBI where information
is constantly freely shared the CIA is
set up to do the opposite and lastly yes
most important point of all Halperin was
being questioned about the am lies case
and and somebody from the Church
Committee had seen diem last five and
there was a note on the MLS file that
this file wasn't supposed to go out of
the branch that is out of SAS without
the permission of the case officer and
Halperin explained that that was more or
less normal procedure and in fact that
if you sent if you asked SAS has Lee
Harvey Oswald worked for you he didn't
use that name this is what he was saying
and if the case officer for Lee Harvey
Oswald didn't want anybody outside SA
has to know then they would not find out
I mean it's as simple as that I mean
what you wouldn't ask did he work for
you you asked for information about Lee
Harvey Oswald but that specific piece of
information would not be provided a help
it was very clear if he didn't want to
provide thank you David I just like to
make three comments in response to that
first of all yes the information was
very tightly held I think the importance
of Jane roman's testimony to John and I
was that the information was being held
in SAS and it was it was the
intentionality that she was talking
about that that somebody was taking
action with regard to Oswald's file
fully knowing that he was an object of
their interest we don't know who those
people were but I believe Jane that they
were in Special Affairs staff who George
Jo and edie's reported to is a very good
question um he was supposed to submit
monthly reports on the d-r-e all the
case officers in Miami did this we have
the we have the reports on the d-r-e
from September 1960 up to November 1962
Joanne Dedes takes over the handling of
the d-r-e in December 1962 and that's
when the paper trail on the
that's when the monthly reports on the
am spell operation stop there are no
monthly reports on on the d-r-e for the
next 17 months until April 1964 when
Joanna DS is reassigned to Athens and
then the monthly reports on the am spell
program start again so what happened to
was Joanne d DS reporting in writing
those records have never surfaced
reports but there are a tremendous
number of reports on specific things yes
but but the case officers synthesis of
what's going on with the group there are
there's a 17 month gap and it coincides
exactly with Joanne d DS handling of the
group and a third point on Sam Halpern I
think I think his testimony on this
point is well-taken and the points well
taken there but I interviewed Sam
Halpern twice on the on the with the
tape record ago and asked him who ran
the d-r-e in Miami on behalf of the CIA
in 1963 and he's told me in two separate
interviews that he had no idea after I
uncovered Johanna DS personnel file and
demonstrated that he was handling the
group he sent word through his friends
and the chat groups that he knew all
about George Johnny D's George Johnny
D's was a stand-up guy and wouldn't have
had anything to do with the Kennedy
assassination so we can see that there's
a level of unwillingness of CIA insiders
to come clean about what Joannie DS was
doing in 1963 and we still don't we
still don't fully know sure John Newman
said they asked in the Q&A about the
found the smoking gun the 911 smoking
gun yeah okay well when when I wrote
Oswald in the CIA at the time we could
see that these there was something
terribly wrong with a lot of the the
reports the the inaccuracies and I
remember talking to Jeff about at the
time and it didn't have a framework for
putting it together so we just called it
smoke one smoke - smoke three smoke four
and in the chapter the smoking file but
years laters I had time to reflect on it
and went back
to the archives and looked at more the
records less redacted it occurred to me
what we were looking at were two parts
of the problem what was one part to
create the story the other part was to
suppress it until 1122 because we didn't
suppress at a hospital isn't going to be
in the window up there with a gun it's
it's he's a very threatening profile if
you think about it
two-time defecting commie pinko
ex-marine and threatened to give
classified information to the Russians
in front of the Soviet US a consul and
Soviet Union and then he's down there
Mexico City meeting with a KGB assassin
Valery caustic off and all this sort of
stuff so if if if the story is told that
if the d-r-e story is revealed to the
station it escalates his profile which
was already bad enough but there are a
number of other things that pointed out
in the book at the time the the turning
off of the of the alert status on Oswald
the FBI the very day the Mexico story
said he hit the the the failure to
provide the Mexico City station with the
photographs of Oz well they asked for
and there's I could go on there's about
ten things and when I look at them
collectively they all look like
suppression of a story
keeping a virus dormant if you will
until so until eleven twenty two at
which time it played out in in its role
and helped head off any true
investigation I mean how do you murder
the president the United States and
ensure that the CIA and the FBI aren't
going to investigate it you needed a
World War three story or something like
that the function like that so that's
why I felt in in the out-years that that
the real smoking gun was that pre
assassination not just the cooking up of
the story but controlling it suppressing
it and it took fire firemen in in
various places some in the CIA and some
of the FBI to do it and that's my
operating concept right now I might be
wrong but that's the way it's being to
look to me and I think I might pass on
9/11 for sake of time unless you really
want me to go into that you do
okay smoking yeah Commission I just
would like to hear what you were
friended all right well I've been
working on it for about the past five
months I have about seven chapters
written so I'll try and do it in in one
minute
the the FBI you know al Qaeda didn't
didn't acknowledge that they did this
thing right away so we thought that they
did and so the big the name of the game
for the first couple of weeks was to
find out the evidence and it turned out
to be evidence of money transfers from
the United Arab Emirates and in
particular one individual and so when
they discovered these wire transfers the
FBI announced the Newsweek and and other
organizations out we found the smoking
gun
linking bin Laden to to this to this
case well two weeks later they found out
who this individual was he was a British
agent Omar Saeed amar Ahmed Saeed Sheikh
who had kidnapped Americans kidnapped
British caused deaths and who had never
been brought to justice because we
didn't indict him and we didn't put him
in prison to the British because he was
our penetration of the senior al Qaeda
leadership had trained the the pilots
how to live in the West in in Pakistan
and working all the time with a head of
Pakistani intelligence and the the two
of the three key core commanders in
Pakistan were his bosses the the FBI
found this out two weeks later when they
examined Omar cellphone records and show
you know showed the the the
conversations with with the ISI chief
that's the the head of Pakistani
intelligence and how the last hundred
thousand dollars was actually obtained
and given to us ah here and that was
that they kidnapped a an Indian shoe
sales tycoon ransom day about eight
hundred and thirty or so thousand
dollars from him sent a hundred thousand
of it to Omar and UAE and that last
hundred thousand dollars are transferred
on August 14th here with which they use
to buy the airline tickets to fly their
recon missions and their final flights
it couldn't have come at a worse time
the revelation of those phone records
occurred on the 8th of October the very
day that British and American forces
were going in to Afghanistan and it was
about the worst thing you could discover
that a British agent had been a lot of
let off the hook for his crimes by the
Americans and the British because we
thought he was our window in fact our
only window into the senior al-qaeda
leadership was a very damaging story for
for Musharraf who we needed as an ally
for Tony Blair and for the the Bush
administration and that was the who the
nine The Smoking Gun really turned out
to be and that's the worry was
suppressing it I don't want to it takes
a lot of time to tell you how it was and
and what the media coverage was but
within three weeks it was gone and by
the way he is the person who who
murdered Wall Street Journal reporter
Daniel Pearl a few months later yes I
want to commend Jeff and John for the
great work they've done and I think it's
you know moved all of our understanding
forward and I think they're to be
commended and Jeff I hope you get your
book contracts you to put this all in
book for him I'm curious it seems from
what you said that you can have a benign
kind of analysis of what was happening
with the d-r-e and Joe and Edie's and
Oswald up until November 22nd
I mean Oswald was a strange character
ex-soviet defector
you know surely our intelligence is
going to be monitoring him but I'm very
curious what happens immediately after
the assassination as you point out with
news stories with various disinformation
pieces being circulated
then immediately after the assassination
about Oswald in his connection to the
Communist world and a wonder you I don't
think you mentioned David Phillips but
obviously he's a key figure he seems in
a lot of people's research who do you
feel was disseminating this information
about Oswald immediately after was to
just the d-r-e
were they doing it under orders from
someone in within the agency and if so
who
it's a good it's a it's a good question
and it's a little bit it's a little bit
unclear the the members of the d-r-e
didn't need any prodding to jump on the
story of Lee Harvey Oswald and I think
that was probably by design there there
are possible benign interpretations of
of what was going on in August 1963 that
would render Jo and edie's either
incompetent that he simply missed Oswald
missed his significance failed to report
on him and that he subsequently after
that had to hide that mitigating against
that is the fact that in April 1964
George Jo and edie's on his job
evaluation in every category received a
99 or higher rating the highest possible
rating he could have received so he had
the total confidence of his superiors
whatever he knew he did he did not fail
to do anything that his superiors wanted
to do in 1963 that's the first point
a second point I mean Oswald's biography
became known very quickly
the importance of the am spell operation
is that they deliver factual
confirmation of a Cuban connection not
merely of Oswald's general leftist
inclination or his time in the Soviet
Union but his recent activities in the
recent past on behalf of a pro-castro
organization the fair play for Cuba
committee so there their impact is very
strong on the first and the first day's
coverage of the of the assassination
other people are also doing that I
should say too that the DRDs campaign to
link Oswald and Castro was not limited
to just these phone calls up to
reporters on the night of November 22nd
one member of the d-r-e
called Clare Boothe Luce the wife of
Henry Luce the editor of Time Life
magazine probably the most influential
figure in American journalism Clare
Boothe Luce told the story of receiving
a call from a d-r-e member late on the
night of the 22nd and telling her that
the d-r-e had hard evidence that Oswald
had been working for a Cuban
assassination team
Mexico City well whatever we make of
that story the remarkable thing about it
is that the caller from the d-r-e knew
that Oswalt had been in Mexico City at
that point the night of November 22nd
there were a handful of CIA people and J
Edgar Hoover were the own and people in
the CIA station in Mexico were the only
people who knew it how did a 27 year old
engineer head of the d-r-e
how did he know that Oswald had been in
Mexico City
we don't know I think the figure of
David Phillips is important in
understanding the larger context and
John's going to talk a little bit about
him yeah I actually wrote something in
probe many years ago about this not not
not very much so if if you have that or
the person who asked the question you
might want to go back and look at that
so right off the top of my head it's
very interesting at the time that Lee
Harvey Oswald was in Mexico City
somebody was promoted to to head of
covert operations for Cuba at that time
that was David at Lee Phillips in fact
he was it was it wasn't just a it was a
promotion not just for the job he was
doing but gs-15 he had to eat for every
if you look at his personnel record he
he hadn't to promote it forever for over
ten years I think I'm just doing this
from memory now but sure enough when
Oswald went to Mexico City
David Ali Phillips is promoted to a
gs-15 which is kind of you know that's
that's the benchmark to get in if you're
government service person here you know
what I'm talking about
gs-15 is would have you know bottom rung
of the club and a more intriguing than
that is that during that three-day
period I was talking about before when
the d-r-e Oswald story crashes into CIA
headquarters on those three days 8 9 10
October and these this cable exchanges
going on between headquarters in the
station he takes this tty to Miami and I
think probably the headquarters to all
the weight on the evidence for it but
there is evidence in the files that
shows the the plane or the flight
arrangements on Eastern Airlines believe
to Miami back going to Jam wait so he's
coordinating something with Jam way with
the very time these cables are exchanged
and I'd make one other point his
testimony to the HSA is one
the reasons that we know that those
cables from the station were altered
there are others who also remember
having put in the cables in fact
practically everybody who was in the
Mexico City station said so to the HSC a
or the Review Board under oath that they
did report Oswald's contacts with the
Cuban consulate and so on but but
Phillips told an even better story to
the Washington Post and this is the
missing in my book of you if you're
familiar with it the missing transcript
of Monday where he talks about receiving
money in exchange for information
so Phillips says is was deeply involved
in Cuban operations and he in he ended
up taking taking over at the very time
that Oswald brings his FPC credentials
and the Cuban story into the into the
Mexican capital and and they send all
the reports back and forth to the
headquarters about it so he's in the
middle of it but you know other than and
of course this is completely separate
from what gate and finds he did and all
the rest of it but when I got into put
them the electron microscope on Mexico
City I found here there he was right in
the middle of the story one addendum to
that is David alley Phillips was
stationed in Havana in 1960 when the
when the revolutionary student
Directorate was first formed by
anti-castro students on the University
of Havana campus Phillips recruited the
members of the of the organization and
when they faced suppression from the
Castro forces on campus helped them to
to migrate to Miami and establish the
operation there so David Lee Phillips
was in on the creation of the
revolutionary student director he was
its case officer in the at the very
beginning he praises the group quite
highly in his biography as does Howard
hunt so the the the the use of the of
the d-r-e
as an instrument of US policy in the
early 1960s I think it was very clearly
established and so to David's question
about you know who's guiding this thing
we don't know exactly but I think that
the fact that that David Phillips is the
godfather of the d-r-e
within the CIA speaks very strong
to his knowledge and intentions around
the group yeah Brett George how do you
pronounce his last name again Joe and
edie's Joe and Edie's okay um you know I
studied a little bit about the student
the Cuban student Directorate and one of
the things that I found out was that
they seemed to show up in different
places where there was a conflict
between them and some pro-castro
elements and I'm not talking about
Oswald in New Orleans but particularly
Tampa Florida which I did a thesis on
and in October of nut or excuse me
November in December of 1961 there were
some demonstrations in Tampa which had a
lot large pro-castro community and which
there were demonstrations and at the
demonstrations that were anti-castro
Cubans particularly the Cuban
revolutionary council and the d-r-e
attended some of these demonstrations
around the same time guy Bannister was
working out of the same office in New
Orleans with a Cuban revolutionary
council the same small building and they
were well aware of each other's presence
the thing is what I'm trying to find out
from you is now and you mentioned Jude
Jonah deenis was became head of the
rather directed the operation of the
d-r-e
in what was it December 62 at the ami
the date yes okay because the d-r-e was
getting in conflicts like the CRC was
with the anti or with the pro-castro
Cubans in Tampa and I was wondering if
you have any evidence that this was a
specific purpose yeah I don't read to
basically get involved in little
scuffles with pro-castro elements in the
United States and solutely it was and
you saw Joe and edie's his job
evaluation he was supporting the group
for political action intelligence
collection and propaganda and so these
confrontations with pro-castro groups
were part of why the agency was funding
them and this continued throughout in
September 1963 just a couple weeks after
the DRDs encounters with oswald
joe and edie's gives four leaders of the
d-r-e 660 dollars to travel
to New York City to take on a group of
pro-castro students who had just
returned from Cuba at spending the
summer there and we're going to speak
out in defense of what of what Castro
was doing the d-r-e leaders went there
provoked a brawl in Town Hall they
turned into a mini riot in the streets
of Times Square and and this was clearly
what what Joe and edie's intended
because he gave them the money to go do
it
and to strengthen one of the reasons why
I believe Joe and edie's hand is so
deeply involved this on the way back two
of those members of the d-r-e
are invited to give testimony to the
house on American committees activity
the house on American Activities
Committee about pro-castro activity in
the United States so that's what the D
Ari's purpose was that's why the CIA was
funding them Committee on Intelligence
later on they were they were
investigating the fair play for Cuba
committee as far back as 1960 they
talked to people like Robert Tabor and V
T Lee testified in February of 63 and
William C Kramer the congressman from
st. Petersburg Florida who was the
biggest foe of the fair play for Cuba
committee in Congress testified and you
know talked about a huge way to bring
people in this country who were
pro-castro that Castro was sending his
agents in the United States may have
been true you know I don't know if his
particular area the fair play for Cuba
committee was definitely funded by the
Cuban government and this rankled people
at the CIA to no end because Bush was
you know apparently a claim that Robert
taper received $1,000 or 6,000 I don't
think there's any doubt that the fair
play for Cuba committee got support from
the Cuban government
Greta correct right
I just wanted to elaborate for a second
on the issue of the falsification of the
record on Mexico City and asked for
comment I'm John I know in Ray Rocco's
deposition to the HSE a which became
public recently he asked at one point
well where all the earlier cables so
even people in Washington not just in
from Mexico City recognized a
discrepancy in the story mm-hmm
and also John had mentioned david
phillips story in The Washington Post in
76 about this missing tape you know if
you read the two transcripts of the
purported Oswalt tapes they're fairly
innocuous there's a couple of disturbing
things in them like where Oswalt is
supposed to have said well the Cubans
have my address and also the name Costa
cough or a version of it shows up but
also at the time the day after Phillips
relayed the story about this missing
conversation with somewhat more sinister
connotations to the house they flew down
to Guadalajara Mexico and interviewed
the two Tarasov translators and got them
both to provide the same story in much
more detail Boris
Tarasov a year and a half later before
the HSA in the Blakey era retracted his
story although I henna did not and I
think it ties it to this notion of the
bombshell coming up for Mexico City on
the 22nd and we don't even really know
exactly what that bombshell was I think
at this point because it did the
likelihood that the tape of the phone
conversation is something which itself
is not even in the record at this point
yeah I it's it's both the tapes and the
story of his Cuban contacts down there
all that had had to go away I don't want
to get into the taste right now just to
do it would take too much time I've done
that many times
90% of you've heard that before and
those you haven't please contact been
wet and you can get the whole interview
but I will say I I think it's even more
we're not even more pernicious but it's
it's a real problem that it
if those cables were altered now the
first guy who really pushed this button
and I think was probably fired partly
for that was Richard Sprague was head of
the HSA he ran into this they were
investigating this and of course when
they talked to the people from Mexico
Station they found it the same thing we
review aborted all of them say that they
sent they were this missing conversation
were talking about but while all thes
contacts for the Cuban consulate
reported Angleton's replacement at
headquarters culeros wrote a memo in
which he said that the cables in october
contained information on Oswald's Cuban
contacts I know that the review board
tried to get their arms around this and
maybe tomorrow Jeremy Gunn that somebody
can ask him if you're here about this
issue by examining the the serials very
closely to try and get a handle on
whether or not they could establish that
some were missing or the mitzva
hanky-panky and it were so disorganized
that they were unable to do this which
is ridiculous because the little ladies
and tennis shoes were meticulous uh at
the CI if you've ever seen that huge
huge file so right at the point at the
fulcrum
when Oswald's in Mexico City and these
cables are exchanged it's just a shovel
there's cereals missing you can't tell
anything from it so for me it's it's
a-you know it's it it's it's something
that really makes me mad when I think
about it now we try and put the record
back together again and it's gone it's
just not there the tapes we know a
little bit more about because we we can
interview people listen to them like
Slauson who finally came clean with the
review board at long last that yes he
had listened to him a rumor that we'd
heard for what 25 years in the research
community based on a phone conversation
with our good british friend at the
poolside with with coleman but you know
the the the issue of falsifying the the
story out of mexico city i think is is
very important because what the CIA is
doing is hiding what it knew
about Oswald's Cuban story before the
assassination and that's the very story
that was used to leverage the Warren
Commission into being I'm curious if you
guys have thought about why the SAS
would be so keenly interested in Oswald
at a time when Oswald is so keenly
interested in getting into Cuba yeah let
me say you can take this one too
I just I'm not gonna go expansive on my
answer to that but I want to bring up
one specific thing that the Church
Committee I think it was vol 5 or 6 it's
been a long time so I don't remember
which one and it's still classified but
this the the report that I'm going to
refer to but it's referring the report
is referred to in a footnote in volume 5
or 6 of the church committee in which it
said that the CIA informed the FBI at
the time of of Oswald's visit that they
they to Mexico City that they were going
to conduct an operation against the F
PCC to embarrass it and they were going
to disseminate misleading information to
embarrass the FPC see in other countries
and it's just in a footnote and I've
written on that I've pointed that out in
a couple of places but the the reason I
bring that up and answer your question
you have why would they be interested in
the in the d-r-e excuse me why would the
SAS be interested because they they
would they were interested in
discrediting the FPC c41 so that would
be actually a legitimate operation and
that's the way I can I conceive of all
this happening of Witten signing off on
stuff that he knows isn't true that
there's their legitimate
counterintelligence operations going on
in the SAS within which a conspirator
could depress the the virus until 1122
okay so the people that are doing this
inside the SAS I don't see them either
as witting conspirators although there
might have been a fireman over there now
I just don't know who you might know
better if you've been talking to Sam
Halpern and those
and opening up this this Escalon at the
top of the SAS including Fitzgerald but
obviously that that did you want to add
anything to that question yeah
Jeff that might be a good idea if you
could inform people about your current
efforts to get information because he it
bears on a couple of things including
the new problems that have arisen since
the JFK board went out of existence
yeah actually like to do that just one
additional note on David Phillips I do
want to say I believe that the interest
in Oswald that is manifested by the DRDs
contacts with him in August 1963
probably was related to the fair play
for Cuba committee John in his book
sketches a very interesting
counterintelligence operations that that
CIA people did against fair play for
Cuba activists earlier 60 earlier in
1960 and David Phillips was deeply
involved in those so I don't think i
think that that's a that that's the
explanation for the nature of the
interest last December I filed the laws
a year ago I filed a FOIA to the CIA at
requesting all records on George Jo and
edie's they wrote back and said that
they had disclosed everything to the JFK
Review Board which clearly wasn't true
so I filed in December I filed a lawsuit
with Jim representing me and made
another request for all Joannie DS
related material and the CIA came back
and acknowledged finally that they do
have George Johnny D's material we
requite then requested that they provide
us with the easily accessible documents
that didn't need to be referred to other
agencies immediately and hold off on
releasing the other material that had to
be cleared with other agencies till
later in the year the CIA opposed that
motion and the judge recently supported
their their motions so the way the
lawsuit stands now is the CIA as
promised
to release Giorgio and Edie's material
in December of this year
correction they've promised in December
to report on whether or not there's any
information to be released okay you have
to understand how we CIA work okay
special Affairs staff yes we're done any
further questions okay our next panel is
not not scheduled to meet for another 50
minutes so we can either go ahead tastic
break we had a short break earlier
yeah yeah